                  Note on Terrain input to CTDMPLUS/CTSCREEN

                                 Donna Schwede

                                August 9, 1993

       The purpose of this note is to address the most commonly asked
questions related to preparing the terrain file required by CTDMPLUS/CTSCREEN.  
Topics include selecting the coordinate system, contour digitizing, judging 
the fit, and obtaining a hard copy of your results.  A description of the
required inputs and technical basis of the terrain preprocessor is provided in
The Complex Terrain Dispersion Model Terrain Preprocessor System User's Guide
(Mills et al., 1987).  Since the publication of this user's guide, the programs
have been slightly modified in order to be compatible with the CTDMPLUS menu
driver.  Users should refer to the User's Guide to the Complex Terrain
Dispersion Model (Perry et al., 1989) for information about these changes.  We
are currently reviewing all aspects of the terrain preprocessing procedures and
expect to eliminate some of the below-mentioned concerns with future updates to
the terrain preprocessing programs.

1.  Coordinate system

       The coordinate system used in CTDMPLUS/CTSCREEN is user defined.  Three 
common coordinate systems are stack centered, hill centered, and Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM). Users may use any coordinate system as long as the 
same system is used for locating the terrain features, receptors, stack(s), 
and meteorological tower.  A conversion factor is input to CTDMPLUS/CTSCREEN 
to convert from user units to meters.  

       Users have encountered problems with coordinates that have too many 
significant figures. For example, mathematical errors, due to lack of 
precision, can occur in the FITCON program when coordinates with many (6-7) 
significant digits are used.  Also, the terrain preprocessor programs 
currently output results in an E10.4 or E15.4 format.  If more than 4 
significant digits were input to the FITCON, the contours drawn by PLOTCON may 
appear as straight lines which bear little resemblance to the input contours.  
Also, the parameters input to CTDMPLUS/CTSCREEN to describe the hill will not 
be accurate.  Using the UTM coordinate system can cause problems such as 
these.  With all coordinates, use no more than 4 significant figures (e.g. use 
6453, 6462, 6537; not 706453, 706462, 706537). 

2.  Contour Digitization

2.1 Base elevation considerations

       CTDMPLUS requires terrain information from the base elevation (i.e. 
lowest ground elevation considering the ground elevations of all stacks and 
the meteorological tower) to hill top.  This information can be obtained in 
two ways: (1) digitize contours starting at the base elevation; keep in mind 
that the lower contours can strongly influence the overall shape of the three-
dimensional (3-D) terrain feature, or (2) digitize the upper part of the hill 
(where the plume is expected to interact) and allow the terrain preprocessor 
(HCRIT mode 2) to extrapolate the upper hill information down to the base 
elevation.  The method chosen will depend on the terrain.  If terrain 
information is not available down to base elevation or if inclusion of 
contours down to the base elevation would significantly bias the fitted shape 
of the hill at the important elevations of likely plume interaction, HCRIT 
mode 2 should be selected.  Using this mode, the user must choose the lowest 
critical elevation (at or below base elevation) and the number of critical 
elevations.  The number of critical elevations should be greater than the 
number of input contours, but no more than 20.  Since the HCRIT program 
requires little time to run, selecting a large number of critical elevations 
is not unreasonable.  Also, the number of critical elevations does not effect 
the run-time for CTDMPLUS. 

2.2 Vertical spacing of contours

       The number of contours selected for digitization will depend on the 
vertical resolution needed to capture significant changes in the slope and 
shape of the terrain.  The terrain preprocessor does not require a constant 
contour interval of input contours.  Since CTDMPLUS linearly interpolates 
between levels where terrain is provided to it, it is important to provide 
enough information, particularly at the heights where the plume will interact 
with sections of the hill.  

2.3  Complete vs. incomplete contours

       A contour is considered to be complete when the distance between the 
first and last points of the contour is less than 1.0 E-15 user units.  
Therefore, when digitizing a complete contour, users should make the last 
point on a contour a duplicate of the first point. 

       In some cases, it may be inadvisable to digitize a complete contour.  
An example of this is when a contour closes, on the lee-side of the hill, at a 
considerable distance from the hill center; inclusion of the complete contour 
would bias the fit of the hill on the important windward side.  However, users 
should digitize at least a 180ø arc around the user specified hill center. The 
terrain preprocessor will complete contours using a simple reflection process 
about the input hill center.  

       The location of the hill center is an input to the FITCON program that 
is used in the contour completion process.  The input hill center does not 
necessarily have to represent the true center of the hill or the top of the 
actual hill; it is the point about which the reflection will occur for contour 
completion.  Since the location of the input hill center influences the 
contour completion, users should experiment with various locations for the 
hill center before accepting the results from FITCON.  Also, note that, the 
true hill top elevation should be input to FITCON, not the elevation at the 
hill center.  The hill top elevation is used in obtaining the parameters for 
the best-fit inverse polynomial. 

       There may be contour shapes for which the reflection process (contour 
completion) does not provide a good completion of the contour.  For these 
cases, the user may want to complete the contour manually.  To complete a
contour manually, one can follow the trend of existing closed contours and
natural divisions of the topography such as stream beds. 

2.4  Multiple contours at the same elevation

       Some terrain features include multiple peaks and therefore multiple 
contours at the same elevation.  Each contour of the set of multiple contours 
must be input as a complete contour (i.e. distance between first and last 
point of the contour must be less than 1.0 E-15 user units).  The terrain 
preprocessor will connect the contours with a zero area segment and fit the 
set to one ellipse.  If PLOTCON shows a line segment connecting the contours 
in the set, then they have not been input as closed contours and the resulting 
fit will be incorrect. 

3.  Judging the fit

       The PLOTCON program is designed to give users a graphical 
representation of the input terrain and the results of the terrain fitting 
process.  Users should use this program to judge the mathematical fit to the 
actual terrain.  First, the user should look at the results from FITCON. The 
elliptical representations should be reasonable approximations of the input 
contours.  An ellipse should have the same orientation and total area as the 
input contour that it is approximating.  The spatial relationship between 
individual ellipses is not important.  It does not matter if individual 
ellipses cross each other.  The appearance of the completed contours (e.g. 
overlap) is also of little concern as long as the elliptical representations 
adequately fit the input part of the contour.  After the elliptical 
representations have been judged to be acceptable, then the 3-D fit to the 
hill should be assessed.  Users should compare the lengths of the major and 
minor axes and the orientation of the axes (represented by the hill base 
shape) at each critical elevation with those of the actual terrain above that 
height.  The 2-D "shape" of the hill base (elliptical, diamond, square) that 
appears on the screen is otherwise of no importance in judging the fit.  The 
only parameters for the 3-D fit that are used by CTDMPLUS are the hill 
centers, length scales and the profile exponents. 

4.  Hard copy output from PLOTCON

       The options available for obtaining a hard copy of the plots displayed 
by PLOTCON vary depending on the hardware of the computer system and the 
printer.  On some systems, users may run GRAPHICS.COM before starting the menu 
driver, and then hit the Shift and PrtScr keys when it is time to print.  If 
this does not work for your system, try using a screen capture utility.  A 
screen capture utility saves the screen to a file which can be printed or 
incorporated into a document.  The utility should be activated before starting 
the menu driver. Note that some screen capture programs save the screen as it 
appears, e.g. white on a black background.  Since printing a black background 
would use a significant amount of ink, you may want to invert the image to 
black on white. 

5.  References

Mills, M.T., R. Paine, E. Insley, B. Egan. 1987.  The complex terrain 
  dispersion model Terrain preprocessor system --user's guide and program 
  description. EPA/600/8-88/003, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
  Research Triangle Park, NC. 

Perry, S.G., D. Schwede, L. Adams, R. Paine, M. Dennis, M. Mills, D.
  Strimaitis, R. Yamartino, E. Insley. 1989.  User's Guide to the Complex
  Terrain Dispersion Plus Algorithms for Unstable Situations (CTDMPLUS):
  Volume 1.  EPA/600/8-89/041, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research
  Triangle Park, NC.
