                      Model Change Bulletin

                              MCB#3                           3/18/93

                      CTSCREEN (dated 93076)


     This Model Change Bulletin is to notify users of changes
made to correct problems in CTSCREEN (dated 91107).  The specific
changes, the problems addressed, and the consequences of the
changes are summarized in the following.  Reevaluation of the
revised models demonstrated that these modifications did not
affect design concentrations and, thus, should not have a
significant regulatory impact.

     These revisions constitute CTSCREEN (dated 93076) and
completely replace CTSCREEN (dated 91107).  With this bulletin,
the source codes and executables for CTSCREEN (dated 93076) are
being made available for downloading from the Air Quality Models
area of the File Transfer Section of SCRAM.  CTSCREEN (dated
91107) is obsolete and, with this bulletin, will no longer be
available on SCRAM.  All copies of such should be discarded.

     Users of CTSCREEN are referred to a companion WordPerfect
5.1 document (CTPLSMOD.WPF) "Modifications to the CTDMPLUS and
CTSCREEN Models" for more detailed discussion of these problems
(see Documention below).  This document addresses problems which
are common to both CTDMPLUS (dated 91107) and CTSCREEN (dated
91107) and those unique to CTSCREEN (dated 91107).  Sections 1
and 2 below follow the outline of the companion WordPerfect
document.  All of the problems described in the following have
been corrected in CTDMPLUS (dated 93076) and CTSCREEN (dated
93076).


1. PROBLEMS COMMON TO BOTH CTDMPLUS (dated 91107) AND CTSCREEN    
   (dated 91107)


1.1  Wrap Calculations

     Two problems are related to situations where a source is
very close to the terrain feature:  1) model adjustment of WRAP
ellipse size to prevent a source from being located inside the
fitted ellipse (to prevent a mathematical error) and 2) a travel
time problem for receptors located on actual terrain contours
that 'jut out' in the upwind direction from the fitted ellipse. 
Both problems may inappropriately affect concentrations during
stable/neutral conditions.  The second problem, in particular,
may result in significant overestimates.


1.2  Convergence Problem

     The algorithm in CTDMPLUS and CTSCREEN for computing the
position of the streamline that passes through the source
occasionally has problems converging on a solution.  This results
in the error message "ENDLESS LOOP IN PATH" and a null
concentration calculation for the given simulation.  Calculations
for other simulations are not affected.  This error occurs only
in stable/neutral conditions.


1.3  Meteorological PROFILE file

     CTDMPLUS and CTSCREEN expect that the instrumentation levels
for the meteorological tower are entered in increasing order in
the PROFILE file.  The check for this was coded incorrectly.  In
some cases this may result in an abnormal termination with the
error message "PROFILE HEIGHT VALUE INCORRECT ..."; this may
occur even when the data are entered correctly.  This coding
error does not affect concentration estimates.


1.4  Limit on Convective Scaling Velocity

     CTDMPLUS and CTSCREEN place a lower limit on the convective
scaling velocity of 0.167 times the wind speed half-way between
stack-top and plume height.  In multiple stack situations this
algorithm may result in an incorrect scaling velocity.  This
affects CTDMPLUS calculations in convective conditions only.  It
has no affect on CTSCREEN estimates because wind speed is assumed
to be constant with height; thus, in CTSCREEN, the minimum
convective scaling velocity will be the same for all stacks
regardless of final plume rise.


1.5  Negative Emission Rates

     The models do not currently allow negative emission rates. 
This prevents the use of negative emission rates to estimate air
quality improvement when an existing source is retired.


1.6  Source Contribution Table

     The CTDMPLUS and CTSCREEN option for source contribution
tables potentially can result in an extremely large output file
(CTDM.OUT).  To avoid this, source contribution tables in
CTDMPLUS (dated 93076) and CTSCTEEN (dated 93076) are written to
a separate file (ASCII or Binary).

1.7  Special handling of receptors below stack top

     An additional switch (ISTKTP) has been added to the CTDM.IN
file. Setting this switch to 1 will cause the contribution from a
particular source to be set to 0 for all receptors with
elevations below stack-top for that source.  This switch will
facilitate analysis of results for situations requiring both
simple and complex terrain modeling.


2.   PROBLEMS AFFECTING CTSCREEN (dated 91107) ONLY

2.1  Calculation of Convective Scaling Velocity

     CTSCREEN calculates an initial estimate of the convective
scaling velocity (w*) using the default mixing height of 50
meters obtained from the surface input file.  Later in the
program when mixing heights are calculated as a function of hill
height, CTSCREEN fails to recalculate w*.  This affects
concentration calculations in convective conditions.

2.2  Determination of Mixing Height

     In CTSCREEN the mixing height is determined as a function of
hill height.  This results in two problems.  First, in multiple
hill situations, modeling is performed using mixing height
estimates for all hills regardless of where the receptors may be
located.  This is incorrect, modeling should only be performed
using mixing height estimates for the hill on which the receptors
reside.  Secondly, there are occasions when the effective plume
height exceeds the maximum mixing height estimate for a given
hill.  This results, erroneously, in a zero concentration
estimate for the given simulation.


2.3  CTSCREEN Output Files

     As a result of our own experiences and those of many users,
the output files from CTSCREEN (dated 91107) were determined to
be inadequate for fully analyzing the model results.  CTSCREEN
(dated 93076) provides improvements, including a separate
meteorology file (METDAT) which provides a better summary of the
meteorological conditions and facilitates postprocessing of
concentration estimates.  In addition, the menu driver has been
modified, as necessary, to accept this new (METDAT) file.


2.4  CTSCREEN Error Messages

     Diagnostic messages (in the CTDM.OUT file) are labeled with
the wrong simulation number (one less than the correct number). 
This is a result of the error message being written before the
counter is incremented.  This error does not affect concentration
estimates.


3.   Documentation

     Modifications to correct these problems have been completed
and are described in a companion WordPerfect 5.1 document
(CTPLSMOD.WPF) "Modifications to the CTDMPLUS and CTSCREEN
Models".  This document provides detailed discussion of these
problems, how they were resolved, the likely effect of the
modifications on modeled concentrationss, and the results of a
model reevaluation.  It is available for downloading from SCRAM
as file CTPLSMOD.ZIP.  Additional material is provided in the
WordPerfect 5.1 document (CTSCSUP.WPF) which describes
modifications to the CTSCREEN user's guide.  The latter document
is available for downloading from SCRAM as CTSCSUP.ZIP.


4.   CTSCREEN Design Value Comparisons

     CTSCREEN (dated 93076) was tested and reevaluated using the
Lovett, Westvaco, and Widows Creek data sets from previous
evaluations.  For the Lovett data base, the overall maximum
concentration decreased by 8.7 percent but, remained well above
the observed maximum at Lovett; for the Westvaco data base, there
was no change in the overall maximum concentration; for the
Widows Creek data base, the overall maximum concentration
decreased by 14.1 percent but, remained well above the observed
maximum at Widows Creek.


5.   Contacts for Questions

     Questions related to the use of CTDMPLUS in specific
regulatory applications should be directed to the appropriate
regulatory agency or Regional Modeling Contact (see State/Local
Modeling Contacts in the Agency Communications Section of SCRAM).

     Generic questions related to the use and regulatory
applicability of the model should be directed to Desmond Bailey
via SCRAM EMAIL or phone (919) 541-5248.

     Questions or problems related to program execution should be
reported to Donna Schwede via SCRAM EMAIL or phone (919) 541-3255
or to Steve Perry phone (919) 541-1341.

     Users who would like to share comments, suggestions, or
helpful hints are encouraged to use the Model Conferencing area
on the SCRAM Bulletin Board (see Model Conferencing area in the
Public Communications Section of SCRAM).

     Technical correspondence should be directed to:

     Dr. Steven Perry or
     Ms. Donna Schwede
     Applied Modeling Research Branch
     ACMD/AREAL/USEPA
     MD-80
     Research Triangle Park, NC  27711

     Fax: (919) 541-1379
